[Music]
how can someone right now where we may
not be able to make the systemic changes
that we need to make as rapidly as we
need to make them how does an individual
bulletproof themselves against what's
going on in the economy right now I hope
you enjoyed this episode brought to you
by our sponsors at blinka study welcome
to impact theory
today's guest is Andrew yang he's an
entrepreneur and former presidential
candidate turned philanthropist and CNN
political commentator the Obama White
House named him a champion of change in
2012 and his fresh take on the faults in
the current model of capitalism paired
with his data-driven human first
approach to business saw him enlisted as
a presidential ambassador for
entrepreneurship in 2015 now despite
having suspended his 2020 bid for the
presidency he is nonetheless providing a
vision for how we move forward through
his podcast yang speaks and his
philanthropic initiatives including his
most recent project humanity forward
Andrew welcome to the podcast man oh
thanks for having me Tom I appreciate it
dude I'm super excited to have you on
the show watching you go through the
process of running for presidency I was
really excited I was really excited by
the way that you think by the way that
you let data drive your decisions I'm so
obsessive about that here in my company
I will say that well I understand the
impulse as an entrepreneur because there
is something very very particular and
important to starting a business running
a business making payroll being
responsible for an organization it is
its own process and it certainly defined
me as an adult
really when when I was the CEO of my
company I felt like I was the head of a
family or head of a really big household
no question it when you really stop and
take on that kind of responsibility and
you take on the fact one
that I've said about being an
entrepreneur is when your house is on
the line and that those were really the
stakes for Lisa and I when we first
started quest was you know we had been
in this other company we've been doing
fine and when we transition to starting
quest was such a huge question mark and
obviously we didn't know if it's going
to work it was like alright if we do
this we have to face honestly that we
could lose our house and there was
something clarifying about that all of a
sudden for me ego went out the window
and it was just what is the data thing
what's working what's not working and
then as you begin to take on employees
what you really do feel like the head of
a family you're like yo these people
either have a roof over their head or a
great Christmas or they're able to you
know make sure that their family is
eating healthy food based on whether I
can keep this company running or not and
whether I make the right decisions or
not and so that was going through that
process was part of what gave me sort of
this halo glow around capitalism around
entrepreneurship running companies and
it's been really sad for me to see how
dysfunctional it's become and that there
are so many people and in fact this is
there's a couple things I want to talk
about one why you're doing the podcast
which I think is interesting and what
sort of the core thesis is now that
you're not running for office and then
like as we think about fixing the system
you know capitalism was a system that
treated me very well so I came up
middle-class maybe lower middle class
work my way up became very successful
[__] brutally difficult did not feel
like things were handed to me and and so
I'm looking back like yellow this is
possible this is amazing and to see so
many smart people say no there is a deep
and fundamental flaw and unless we
overcome that people won't be able to to
change classroom I sort of did yeah so
what do you see as as the thing
capsulate sort of the broken part as it
relates to um you know the the average
kid coming out of college right now
which is probably my default which I
know is a little bit different than the
default that you think from but I'd be
interested to hear what you think
and then how you plan to get that
message out to the podcast well I say
Tom everything you said I can relate to
very very directly and in my mind two
things are fundamentally true one is
that entrepreneurs had to work
themselves to the bone in order to build
any kind of quality business or
organization that's successful and I
take it from big company CEOs and
entrepreneurs down to the person who
just like open that food truck that food
truck with so much work but you're gonna
focus like the corner deli or whatever
it was like so much went in like you
know like that they put their heart and
soul into it a lot of them have their
savings or future on the line like those
things are it's totally the case that if
you're an entrepreneur you work your
heart out if you were successful and
then the other thing that's also true
now when I'm a numbers guy is that
entrepreneurship went off a cliff over
the last number of years for young
people for eighty percent of the country
geographically where we've consolidated
away a lot of the opportunities that
would have existed at another point in
time and so it's funny to balance this
tension between being like hey go out
kick ass take names build something
awesome which I love I mean I spent
years of my life trying to help people
do that and also oh by the way I've
looked at the numbers and we are making
it progressively more difficult for
anyone to do what I just said and one of
the examples I use tom is like if you
were to rewind a couple generations ago
what business would someone have started
in Indiana or you know it'll Mississippi
or Weber and they would have started a
flower shop a hardware store a kid's toy
store like you know some kind of
business that like serves people in the
community like now those opportunities
don't even exist it's like you know you
have to be an idiot this is like like a
kid's toy store at like Main Street
Indiana like this is dumb because they
were just gonna like hit a few buttons
and we like get the toys delivered to
them so that the nature of the
opportunities has changed and it's made
it so that
specific types of people are more able
to capitalize on the opportunities that
do exist so let's talk about that what
are those opportunities and the I don't
know if I'm using this term right but
the circle that I'm trying to square is
that when I think about the journey that
I went on so I graduated from college
with a degree in film not exactly very
helpful I didn't you know it's not like
I have a degree in finance
I have no entrepreneurs in my background
I started at the very first company that
was the startup that I worked at I
started as a copywriter and I worked my
way up through that company and then
ultimately founded other companies
multiple companies but founded those
from scratch with equal partners and
built those up and it we quest was
started right at the sort of beginning
of the great recession so we started
that company in 2009 it was officially
launched in 2010 but we were
conceptualizing of it in 2009 at the
height of all the problems and we
bootstrapped it so it was like all of
the things that I think about like I'm
not the person that should have
succeeded right and go to an Ivy League
I didn't go learn finance I don't have
rich friends so how what what is the
sort of core that's fallen out that
makes this now so difficult for like me
are you saying if I were to do all of
that now well your your story actually
feels very familiar to me time and at
this point you know probably dozens of
entrepreneurs who've done things in
different lines of work the fact that
you were a film major or a creative or
an artist is actually a very common
theme and a lot of entrepreneurs you
remind me frankly of many people I know
who went on to become successful
entrepreneurs you know you're like self
disciplined data-driven really clear
thinking like no nonsense
it's like someone like you would find
ways to succeed in a myriad of
organizations just like we've started
out of the copywriter and everyone
around you was like you know what like
if you give Tom [__] to do she gets it
done and it
good and it's actually even better than
whatever the heck you like you gave them
originally because he like improved on
whatever the heck that the project was
and then you just can't keep on accruing
responsibilities you climb up and then
you get to a point where you're like you
know what like I am actually as capable
of anyone that's like starting a
business running a business and then you
go out and do it yeah so all of those
things are actually achingly familiar to
me it's like if a young Tom like shows
up an organization I get so psyched
because you can just like dump stuff on
that person's like epod like end up
building a whole department and
eventually build a company so there are
people that are built like you and if
you had like 100 use lined up now it's
like many of them would still find
success really in any circumstance but
there there are some people that would
not and the ratio of people that would
find success because I'm like a data to
serving on like almost like pattern
matching where like so if there were
like 100 years like split up among the
50 states like you know now it would be
a very very different picture than it
would have been a generation ago I can
say that without the confidence because
like I just looked at the numbers and
the bottom has fallen out in terms of
small business formation in most of the
country and the bottom has fallen out
for this generation behind us like the
folks who are in their 20s and 30s are
starting businesses at
multi-generational Lowe's so talk to me
about what the bottom is what what
exactly has fallen out and all again
I'll contextualize where I come from so
I'm like imagine me for a decade saying
to everybody around me yo pull yourself
up by your bootstraps it's amazing like
you could do this you got it gets killed
that's my obsession gets killed and so I
had to build up the sort of mental and
emotional resilience was not voted most
likely to succeed like this is all about
the all science seems to say 50 percent
of you is just hardwired fifty percent
is malleable so I've always counted the
vast majority of my success to the 50
percent that's valuable not all sure
some of it is a level of intelligence
and all that
but so what why is that like a dirty
word the notion of pulling yourself up
by your bootstraps if this is such a fun
conversation because I think they're
parallel tracks and I think that they're
both necessary so number one is to the
extent that someone can take that 50% of
themselves as valuable and improve upon
it in ways that make them healthier
happier more productive like more
successful better to work with a better
partner because I know that just like
you work on yourself for businesses like
you working yourself in your marriage
and partnership like those things are
all awesome and we should be encouraging
people to do that in whatever way we can
and I know you've done a lot of that it
helps many many people you know I'd like
to think I don't help some people too
and then simultaneously you look up and
you say wait a minute like what has gone
on with our economy where you have so
much talent energy going to problems
that are not actually productive you
know you have really talented
entrepreneurs who are just saying my
goal is to get it gobbled up by the tech
majimak and then get cashed out and then
you know even if they end up squashing
whatever it is I was working on like
well you know that's just the the
process now like my investors will be
happy I'll be rich then maybe I'll like
leave and do it again like you have at
this point like in an economy that is
not actually lining up market driven
rewards with like people's success and
then things that are beneficial for lots
of folks like that the three things are
now kind of split into the second try
didn't or like they're heading in
different directions so I'm all for
helping people kick ass in every
circumstance but then you look up and
say wait a minute like how things really
kind of lost the thread like do we live
in the most dramatic winner-take-all
economy in the history of the world the
corner numbers yes like do we have
greater consolidation in certain
industries and we've ever had yes does
that have like really demented effects
yes one example do you and Lisa have
kids Tom now so what's the one thing
that's happened to me as I became a dad
you know
like seven years ago so we have two boys
seven and for the seven year olds
autistic and like now I'm very sensitive
to the fact that we are seeing record
levels of dysfunction among young people
that are hand-in-hand with smartphone
adoption and social media use like just
like the curves just go straight up the
same like you know exactly thank you
when you say dysfunction what do you
mean what kind of dysfunction like high
levels of depression anxiety antisocial
behavior
it's particularly pronounced among
teenage girls and so one of the things
you would say or this is sort of like a
cousin to like a pulling yourself up by
your bootstraps is like hey parents like
figure it out like don't you notice like
this happened but then you have 40% of
American children who are born to
unmarried mothers which is much higher
than it was when I was growing up and so
if you imagine a household where there's
like one parent and a person's working
and then there's a kid and the kid like
this is getting mesmerized by technology
and then we can see population-wide that
it's like having a negative effect on
their mental health then you look at it
and say okay like there probably should
be a role somewhere for us to try and
improve that these kids development
environment if we're actually seeing
systemic problems with their mental
health and one reason I'm passionate
about this tom is that I love
entrepreneurship so much and the fact
that we've seen entrepreneurship plummet
to multi-generational loads among young
people is related to some of these
things I'm talking about better
system-wide that we've created this
environment where someone's not going to
come out and kick ass and start a new
business instead they're going to be
depressed and miserable and indebted and
can we tease that out a little bit so
the the thrust of my life is going to be
- I've always saw it as a mindset thing
just not not that that solves the entire
problem but what is my particular skill
set where do I think that I'm insightful
so by no means am i saying this is all
you need to do I'm just saying this is
my area of expertise in the small piece
that I'll be able to contribute so I've
always saw I'm imagine me so I let me
give you a little bit of background on
myself
anybody that's watching now and doesn't
know who I am
I for an extra credit assignment in
college I was asked to go in and help a
kid in South Central Los Angeles one of
the worst school districts in the
country to go in and just help him like
mentor him a little bit for eight weeks
help him get his homework done so I go
and do that supposed to be eight weeks
and he's a wild problem and of course
they're trying to get him out of class
which is that exactly why they pick him
throwing tantrums and all this and he
says to me or one day I say you're
supposed to tell him at week six I'm
only coming for two more weeks I tell
him he freaks out nuclear explosion the
kid is going bananas five I'm 18 at this
point I've never seen a human act like
this ever in my life I was beside myself
and I finally get him to calm down and
said look at this because I said I was
only coming for two more weeks he says
yes I said cool look man I will make you
a deal if if you will do your homework
the second that I get here because he
used to like delay and end up keeping me
for longer than I was supposed to if you
don't do your homework the second I get
here as long as I live in Los Angeles I
will help you with your homework is it a
deal
he says yes becomes an eight and a half
year relationship okay
now that plan to feed my soul I'm
watching this kids struggle but I'm
young and stupid I don't know how to
help them so I'm like all right my
mission is to show them that beautiful
things exist and show them that somebody
loves them so I'm dirt poor at this time
but I take him to see movies in Beverly
Hills because I'm like movie cost the
same no matter where you see it but in
one place you're surrounded by green
palm trees is beautiful and so I would
do that and then long story short he
gets sucked into foster care move
farther and farther away we lose contact
flash-forward 15 years later I now have
3000 employees a thousand of them grew
up just like this kid did and so I know
how this plays out and I'm devastated
I'm like whoa this is crazy
like how do I get them to think in a way
that's going to propel them forward and
I start getting obsessed with this
notion of skill set and getting them to
build a skill set and to be able to go
out so okay this becomes my mission I'm
going to help people think in the right
way that will lead them to acquire the
skills that's going to be necessary to
move forward then people hit me with the
learn to code meme right like telling
people to improve and get better is like
[__] so I'm like okay
i something is is making people feel
some kind of way and it's stopping them
from taking what I think are acts of
self-preservation so my thing is hey the
system might be broken and I'm glad
you're doing it that's not my interest
I'm never going to get [__] involved
in politics I cannot tell you how much
that does not interest me I'm very glad
people like you were doing it but that
didn't suck me in so what I want to do
is go if I'm gonna help people Raja
Bullett talk well unfortunately I may
have dodged that bullet because you're
willing to stand in front of it so my
thing is I was I say your wife would say
what I said my wife would say the bullet
hit me pretty good yeah that that seems
pretty clear so I it is so important to
me if I'm going to make a meaningful
contribution with my life to understand
why I'm trying to plant a tree right the
tree of think this way gain these skills
so that you can control your life okay
that's that's my punch line to leave the
fulfillment by the way not money but
that's my thing but it's like I feel
like the soul that like the soil that I
keep trying to plant this into has a
problem that I don't understand even
after researching the [__] out of you
I'm still having a hard time like what
is the floor that's dropped out a kid is
entering the workforce right now what
has gone wrong it's a winner-take-all
but I don't understand why that's a
problem unless the playing field has
become unfair they can't start a local
business that's one thing that you said
but I understand well that's the problem
I didn't start a local business so is it
debt load is it fear is it education is
it all of those like what if you had to
say like the top three things we need to
solve these three things that would then
make this soil fertile for individual
responsibility which to me ultimately is
the punchline what would those three
things be I love this question so much
because I think you've hit the nail on
the head which is you're trying to play
the trees and you're like why is this
soil not fruitful why why am I having so
much trouble playing these streets and
so this would be like a personal
question like what kind of family did
you grow up in Tom my dad
to bounce back and forth between white
collar and blue collar for the most of
my life he was a purchasing manager and
then was an auto mechanic for a while
and then my mom stayed at home for most
of my life but then went into the
workforce when I was like eleven uh what
part of the country was that to come
Washington cool so number one I would
say is the environment these kids are
just reared in growing up in where again
I mentioned a fact where 40% of American
kids are born to single moms that
statistic was around 15% when I was
growing up in the 70s or 80s so so what
I saw that it went from 15 to 40 percent
I was like that can't be right
and I triple-checked didn't like yeah
that's right you know it's more than
doubled since I was a kid so you look up
and say okay what does the data say then
about growing up with a single parent
and 90 percent or so of single parents
are single moms so then you look at the
kids outcomes with single moms and again
we're talking about 40 percent of
American kids how much higher in certain
communities you know like so so the data
says that if you're a little girl who
grows up to a single mom things are okay
like you graduate from high school at
normal levels and there are a number of
reasons for this you have a strong
female role model if you're a little
girl growing up you see mom she's super
mom and little girls tend to be faster
to mature they're good at school they
don't have the same behavioral problems
they graduate from high school and go to
college and add like relatively normal
rates if you have a little boy growing
up to a single mom then unfortunately
the outcomes are significantly worse
where apparently little boys have higher
sensitivity to parental time input and
so if parents spend less time with a
little boy they struggle more they have
higher behavioral problems they mature
more slowly they have economic problems
they have academic problems and there
less likely to pursue higher education
and so you're looking at like the like
you know almost a new normal for like
half of America like you know 40% of
American school kids so then if you were
to go to that K didn't say like hey you
know like you show up to them and and
this is probably the sort of experience
you had with your mentee when you showed
up in LA with the person you imagine
that person multiplied out you said you
had like a thousand employees who might
have been from similar backgrounds like
that is the soil and then you look and
say well why did the American marriage
rate go off a cliff and there are a
number of reasons for this so marriage
and childbearing have both fallen to
historic lows in the United States if
you are a non college graduate man you
have a less than 50/50 shot of ever
being married in your life a high school
educated do you think that's my choice
or what's driving that I've never heard
that said that's terrifying I guess if
people want it and can't have it it's
less worrisome that people just aren't
choosing it well you know you can
project how much of it is like it I want
to suggest that most dudes probably want
to at some point settle down you know
there's like a period when they don't
but then eventually they do so you
rewind a generation or two and you say
okay it's the 1970s you're a high school
educated man and you should know that
the the majority of Americans are high
school graduates like you know the
proportion of Americans who will
graduate from college is about 35% so
you're looking at about two-thirds our
high school graduates another like 10
percent of that 65 percent are
essentially community college two years
associate's vocational but you're
looking at majority high school grads so
if you were to rewind a couple
generations ago and you were a high
school graduate what kind of work might
you do you might have worked in
manufacturing there were 17 million
manufacturing employees in the United
States of America up through the 70s and
80s and the majority of them were men so
that's one of the major employment
sectors for you and there were ways you
could deliver fine middle-class life in
Michigan as like an autoworker or
whatever one never need to go to college
we eliminated five million of those 17
million jobs and again vast majority of
them were blue-collar
men at that same time than the marriage
rate starts to decline so imagine if you
were a blue-collar high school graduate
man you now do not have a steady income
and then it's very very hard for you to
propose to a woman and say hey marry me
because oh by the way I don't have a
city job I don't have any future like
I'm you know it's like I'm not exactly a
great prospect and so that then marriage
rate declines you still occasionally
procreate procreation rate Oh like the
rate we're having kids it has declined
but it hasn't declined as much as a
marriage rate so you have tons of these
kids growing up in single-parent
households generally single moms and
it's lockstep with the fact that we have
decimated the opportunity set for men
who do not have college degrees if you
want to dig even deeper the the academic
out performance for girls is systemic
and it's not just here it's everywhere
but approximately 58 percent of college
saying it's its global it's a global
issue um generally speaking girls are
better at high school than boys
everywhere including the United States
of America so so you're looking at
approximately 58 percent of college
graduates the United States are women
and so you know so you have this like
shrinking group of men that like if
you're a high school grad again less
than 50/50 chance you'll ever get
married and then if you never get
married I mean you might have had this
experience with Lisa so I'm going deep
into this one set of factors but you
said like hey what are the three top
things where you would say like things
are why is the soil not working number
one is family we have done a number on
the family unit and kids are growing up
in really really adverse circumstances
and can I can I say what you just said
in different words just to make sure
that I understand it because this is
really profound if if I'm understanding
it correctly so hey everybody you had a
job first of all you have a world where
there's a lot of people that all call um
under voiced maybe that's the right way
to think about it
it's not that they're invisible or they
don't have a voice but they don't have
as big of a voice or megaphone as a more
highly educated person so their high
school graduate they're going on to the
workforce we've automated a lot of their
jobs away and this creates sort of an
emotional death spiral for these guys
are not able to make the middle-class
income which means they have insecurity
around whether they could support a
family or not and I've and you now I'm
putting my own words to it I'm curious
to see if you agree now that level of
financial and security becomes sort of
emotional insecurity becomes a lack of
confidence and either they don't
actively pursue a relationship for
emotional reasons insecurities or
they're financially they don't feel that
they could support a family and so they
don't pursue it for that reason
or and that is navigating the time is
that maybe they do pursue it but women
are like hey like you know go get a J OB
that I could go out yeah word and so now
you have the family instability created
from this shift in the economy
dude that that is if one is that
accurate that's what you're saying yeah
that's not good
you know Geoffrey Canada yeah yeah sure
dude you're the first person that I
think I've ever had say yes so Geoffrey
Canada you're I am officials oh you've
got guys a superhero a hundred percent
I'm so desperate to get him on the show
because I have a memory that I can't I'm
not sure if it's true but my memory of
his assessment of the situation is you
have to give up on adults you need to
focus on women who are pregnant or about
to become pregnant because if I remember
correctly his analysis was that the big
thing that separates kids who grow up in
the inner city so his what's wrong with
the soil is that basically your ability
to deal with language and to communicate
so we said the average number of words
that the kid growing up in the inner
cities hears is like 2 million words by
the age of five and the ratio positive
negative 70 percent negative 30%
positive and the ratio in the middle
income brackets is exactly flipped so
it's 30% negative 70 percent
live and they also here about five
million words by the time they had five
and he was like the impact that that has
on their language centers and their
ability to process in a communication
environment that you would need to get a
good career he said it cannot be
overstated how important it is to have
that additional access to those language
skills and I was like can it really be
that simple and so hearing you talk
about the the weakening of the family
through the weakening of a certain part
of the economy rings very true so if
that's one the weakening of the family
what are some other things that you
think have depleted the soil so number
one is family number two is our
educational system and the number three
is the nature of the marketplace right
now and what returns your labor can
command so I'm happy to dig into number
two but I just want to talk a little bit
about the Geoffrey Canada I is the
research is really compelling you know
it's like when you look at the number of
traumas that a lot of these kids
experience it makes them incapable of
learning it makes them really really
averse to like certain types of stresses
and environments and then when you show
up and you're like hey like let's let's
fix it's like you know you need a time
machine you need a time machine you need
to go back to the city feel like what
that kid was in the womb like like just
talking about yeah so not number two is
our schooling system like our
educational system is designed for an
agrarian / industrial economy and you
you have social promotion by age and
you're preparing kids for a world in the
economy that stopped existing a long
time ago
really and so one of the things that
breaks my heart is that we have
systematically under invested in
vocational education only six percent of
American high school students are in
technical or apprenticeship tracks in
Germany that's literally 50 percent whoa
so what we have done is we've
essentially said we're going to pretend
that every kids going to kind of go to
college oh by the way that's not true
for the majority of you and if college
is not a good fit for you we're not
going to actually in
best in getting you kind of hard
technical skills that might lead to
gainful employment why I don't know like
why we under invested in it I think it's
because it's more difficult and
expensive to have shops and tools and
garages and trainers and and you know
like actual skills than it is just to
throw the kids in a classroom with some
old textbooks they'll be like you know
let's just pretend I'm going to go to
college so we need to be investing
massive levels of resources in technical
education I would want to team up with
micro dirty jobs and be like look these
jobs are awesome we have a massive
shortage of people to fill those jobs
and then what do we have is we have an
overabundance of people who are going to
college and oh by the way we made
college you know four to a fifty
thousand dollars a year or whatever that
I get is like depending upon what type
of school you go to but why has college
gotten two and a half times more
expensive than when I went or I suspect
you went did it get two and a half times
better no I said did they did they hire
two and a half times more professors no
but like what they did is they hired
150% more administrators not academic
and then they said hey colleges now a
few thousand a year or 60 or whatever it
is and oh if you want to go don't worry
about it like will give you loans and so
you have these kids showing up going to
school they have no business going to
this fix your graduation rate for these
kids showing up to college nationwide is
around fifty nine percent so you have
forty percent of these kids show up not
graduating within six years and so
imagine ending up with like a debt load
and no degree does the school ever
forgive you if you like if it wasn't a
good fit like of course not they're like
hey you almost anyway and so so we have
this completely unresponsive out of date
educational system that is not actually
preparing our kids with real skills
it's just pretending and then they've
also just ginned up the price tag
because of essentially bureaucracy and
overweight lack of accountability just
you know it's institutional incentives
like if you're a school you
just hire more people and then you just
pass the price on to the families and
students and then the students look up
and say I don't have a choice which is
why the school get away with this
because like you know there was a choice
and then the family then turns to the
government who then gives them loan that
may or may not be the right idea yeah
there's there's a lot of stuff going on
in education that freaks me out so
number one what I like what you're
talking about with a vocation and that
to me is a there I think there's a lot
of baggage to that word at least where I
grew up it was just drummed into me that
you know you didn't want to end up that
in color job man that's the stigma it's
like if you do that stuff you're a loser
I like going to go to college but then
meanwhile like we have a total shortage
of skilled work so here's my obsession
I'm glad you're calling it skilled work
so my obsession is to get people to
understand skills have utility so right
now maybe partly because of the way the
school system is rigged it's like you
just need to get the great you don't
have to think about what you're actually
going to do with this information if you
ask your trigonometry teacher why am I
ever going to need to stay active them
cannot answer you so you get this sense
of okay I'm being shuttled into the
system I need to get good grades to
please my parents and society and begin
to school and to sort of follow the
paths okay that's what I'll do and and
so my path just so you know in high
school I just cheated so it seemed very
easy like oh cool I get it I see what
the game is here I will play it very
well I will use my charm to charm the
teacher to turn a blind eye I will charm
my fellow classmates to give me their
works what I can cheat and then when I
went to college I was like whoa hold on
a second I actually want to be a good
filmmaker so what purpose would cheating
serve me and I'm going to be taking out
tens of thousands of dollars in debt
like this is crazy so when I started
college I made myself a promise a RF
sink-or-swim I wasn't gonna cheat not a
little bit nothing and I was gonna see
how well I did because I knew if I
didn't actually learn what I wanted to
learn the whole rest of my life would be
problematic so now I'm like when I when
I have employees I'm like listen you're
learning this thing not to check a boxer
to please meet your learning
because it lets you do something better
than somebody else this is and I just
think in competitive terms though I
think you may point out that this is
sort of systemically a problem but it's
like this is a winner-take-all game
homies like this is not everybody gets
to win like we're either going to be the
industry leader and we're going to get
what we want and we're going to be able
to outperform and stay in business or
we're not and so I was liken it to
building a bridge it's like you learn
architecture because actually lets you
go to [__] bridge like an actual
physical bridge and getting people to
understand that [__] would crumble if
somebody hadn't taken the time to learn
a skill that allowed them to build that
thing and so that that is definitely
part of what freaks me out about the
education system the other one is just
the crippling people with debt that's
the one that's always freaked me out you
graduate with $100,000 in debt you're
gonna play it safe you're not starting a
business
no I yeah completely and we've done that
to millions of kids at this point we're
up to one point six trillion dollars in
student loan debt this is a third leg of
the tripod so number one families have
disintegrated number two our system of
education has not actually tried that
use not even trying to keep up with
realities has gone up in cost and it's
been like we don't really care we're not
accountant doesn't matter it's like this
is about us was like what happened to
you like you know like we already got
paid and the number three is the
marketplace has changed fundamentally
and and so this brings us back to that
you know the evisceration of
manufacturing jobs yes but if you look
up the majority of the jobs that are
getting created now are temp gig or
contract jobs in the economy so the
marketplace has gotten systematically
more punitive and it's hard it's harder
to find a path forward and define
punitive for me you know so the set when
I said the majority of jobs that are
being created are gig Temper contract
jobs I don't know how your organization
functions but you know if you are in
those roles then you have very little
security you often have very little noia
benefits there's massive income
volatility for a lot of these workers
where they can make some money one
weekend and very little the next week
and the massive stressor that's what I
mean by punitive I want to talk about
that for a second
so one of the things that I love about
you is dude you're so even keel and I
feel like you really look at things
through the lens of what humans are
really like and what the reality of the
situation is so help me with this one
one thing that I think is in going back
to education so my mom and her husband
work in in education ish they work for a
school district that's why the right way
to said and when I hear some of the
stories about how impossible it is to
fire somebody I'm always telling you you
you can't run a business like that you
under no circumstance and so I get why
you want to reduce or eliminate
volatility but without that you're not
going to get to a players like I would
much rather be in a company where I've
got a thing for my supper to keep you
because you have options to go wherever
you want to go but I know that I can get
rid of you if you're underperforming so
that I can put together a dream team now
to keep people they have to know like I
always tell my employees I want you to
retire here like I get I'm bucking the
trend I'm not interested in 18 months
I'm interested in 40 years now to do
that I've got to create tremendous
opportunities I've got to give you
autonomy and we won't go into all the
things that I think are that secret
recipe for success but I want to be in
that position where if you underperform
I'm not obligated to keep you and make
sure that you have no volatility but if
you're killing it I want you to be
winning with me how do you you think
about that I my organization was very
similar to yours in the sense I wanted
to keep people want to invest in them
and that that is that your mom's
experience in the school district like I
would very much struggle in many of
those types of environments because if
someone does a bad job I just want to be
like look you're doing a bad job like
someone needs to change or we got to go
but that's not the way school districts
operate you know like teachers are often
unfavorable after three years so you
should know my operating DNA is similar
to yours and the fact that many of the
folks that are like working environments
they're not working environments like
yours where if they kick ass they're
going to be invested in and then have a
path forward and then be given
to grow an autonomy and then and the
organization itself is growing because
that's how you have to create these
opportunities because you keep bringing
people in like that that's one of the
things that was a massive imperative for
me is like if I'm going to create
opportunities for these people like the
top line has to grow but you can create
a virtuous cycle because if you get in
the right people they can go to the top
line and so it's like oh this is great
it's like I just make this thing happen
but then if you get into an environment
like let's call the school district that
school district is not growing and so
then like how can you create it's
awesome opportunities for like different
people it's very hard that's why you
wind up with it so deserve a zero-sum
game where it's like hey you know those
environments where someone needs to die
for you to get promoted you know I mean
but like there's no promotion at but it
looks like and so you've been like I
could wait ten years for that like that
is not unusual in a zero-sum environment
your organization is unusual and
unusually awesome I always try to create
unusually awesome organizations to it
used to be that people would go even
like straight out of school they go work
for a company that had like some mild
reliable growth and then they could grow
with it and they have opportunities but
now you're looking at more of these
zero-sum environments or contracting
environments where the example I just
used I think was like you went I like my
dad worked for GE like GE had growth in
the 70s or whatever like what happened
GE since then I mean most like the
entire plant stuff like closed down like
you know in many parts of the country
and so you're seeing obviously some
pockets of explosive growth in our
economy but most of the economy you're
seeing something closer to a plateau or
even a decline and then if someone's
going to work in those environments
they're just trying to cut costs or like
control costs and then if they bring in
new people they're like hey I'm just
going to treat you like an
interchangeable part all right let's
talk about the context of where we're at
right now the economy talk about
contracting the economy is for sure
going to contract for some period of
time may be short may be very long time
how can someone right now where we may
not be able to make the systemic changes
that we need to make as rapidly as we
need to make them how does an
jool bulletproof themselves against
what's going on in the economy right now
right now is a very very very difficult
time the most difficult time in the
generation and you should adopt a very
lean operating style for yourself like
that this is the time to really batten
down the hatches you have to be very
very realistic that this economy is not
going to snap back like a rubber band
millions of the jobs that have been lost
are not coming back I have heard from
CEOs who said that there permanently
essentially automating and downsizing
and that they don't plan on hiring back
to previous levels even if things do
reopen we are not rubber bands it's not
like if the government says hey you can
go outside again that's all of a sudden
the bars and restaurants and concert
halls and convention centers and I'll be
teeming with activity like of course not
you know everything is going to be at a
diminished rate for a long time so you
should just imagine that it's going to
be a really really disastrous
environment for the foreseeable future
plan accordingly and then if it's better
than that then we can be surprised
positively so one thing that people talk
a lot about with you is you've got a
sort of pessimistic dystopian view the
world but you present it so
optimistically so that's sort of the
downside right batten down the hatches
restrict your spending sort of stay safe
if you will understand that you may be
weathering a very long term storm now
what are things that you know people can
be doing proactively my prescription to
everybody is one get your head right so
you can stay clear most people are going
to panic even if you lose your job
panicking is not going to help you so do
whatever you need to do right now to
learn to stay calm in the middle of the
storm number two understand if you can
make money for somebody you will always
be able to find a job so focus on
skillsets right what you might refer to
as a vocation so focus on getting so
good at something that you can help
somebody else make the money because
maybe now really isn't the time for you
to start your business maybe it is
there's a whole subset of people for
whom that will be the right solution but
just sort of speaking to the broad
people those are my two things that
you're going to be in in a constricted
economy which means that it's going to
be an employer's market they're going to
have the pick of a lot of people coming
to them
so now the way to rise up is to have a
deeper skill set than other people and
some of that interpersonal some of that
is just the the vocational skills of the
job some of it is getting good at
interviewing but the the sort of
trifecta so are those who thinks Plus
learning that the punchline of all this
isn't money its fulfillment it's a
stable sense of emotional well-being
that should be ultimately what you're
aiming for and so those are the three
things that I think people should be
sort of obsessively focused on now is
the economy contracts so beyond
battening down the hatches what are
other things that you try to focus
people on I think your advice is very
similar to the advice I'd give where you
have to focus on yourself first if
you're not right you're not going to be
able to contribute a lot of value in a
lot of different environments and it's a
really hard time to even stay positive
and healthy oneself you know like you
need to have rituals you need to give
yourself victories you need to create a
sort of like an environment of positive
reinforcement and even when you're alone
in your house and that's not easy to do
for days or weeks on end for most people
now but that's job one you can't help
someone else you're in bad shape
yourself I agree with you about trying
to develop skills this is the time to
try and dig into something that you have
not traditionally had time to do so that
could be listening to podcast like this
one are interviews reading books I'm a
reader myself maybe try and develop a
skill that you've wanted to develop in
some dimension whether that's some
coding discipline or some skill with
like a particular program or a creative
endeavor even I think if you can do
something that's creative in this time
it might keep you balanced and positive
but it might end up making you stronger
in some way and I agree with you on
relationships where it doesn't feel like
it but just trying to help someone and
just by helping someone it will end up
making you stronger
you know you'll end up building
connections and and it sense of value
because you know if you have a position
where you feel like you can add value
and
the environment like you said then
someone will sense that about you and
then the opportunities will be there so
I advise is very very similar to yours
hopefully that that lived up to my like
dystopian yet uplifting reputation so
far so good man so one thing I want to
know your ability to assimilate data and
turn it into a real world hypothesis how
to make things better it's pretty
extraordinary you talked about you like
reading what are some things that you're
reading where do you find your
information are you just good at
remembering things you have a process
for that
oh I right now I just started a podcast
which has been great for reading because
a lot of the people I have on I've
written a book and then being a you know
like like you know like a reasonably
diligent type I'm like who I should read
this person's book so my new podcast
yang speaks just launched this week
number eight on Apple very exciting
congratulations by the way that's
extraordinary um thank you
and so then I've been reading the books
that the guests have written so I can
actually flash a couple of them for you
because they're near nearby so so this
one's a this is like politics book it's
a populist guide to 2020 by crystal ball
and I saw your enginee and then if you
were if you're a parent out there and
you want to read that research on like
what technology is doing your kids this
book I Gen box by gene 22 PhD talking
about like what's happening with with
kids mental states so you know like I'd
love to read and having these guests on
has been a great excuse to read now
people learn in different ways like you
know my brother-in-law's of all about
watching videos in like tutorials but
yeah I just find like a way to learn
that you enjoy and then try and go deep
podcasts I mean like I know Tom's got
this awesome podcast I love what you're
about man like I hope that people sense
that it is okay to be maximizing your
skills and self-improvement and sense of
responsibility in your control of your
life your universe while also saying
there are systemic problems that we can
objectively improve on and
I'm very passionate about trying to do
both frankly I love your focus on
individual improvement because it's it's
about the individual and the world both
simultaneously yeah man that's that I
think it's really well fed a and B is
super important
I had historically just I don't know I
wasn't turning a blind eye to it I just
wasn't it wasn't the thing that I paid
attention to but now is I really hold
myself accountable to results and I say
okay
I really feel like I know what people
need to do at the individual level but
you know like I said at the beginning so
many people that I think are just
unreasonably good at taking in the data
and I try not to say intelligent cuz I
don't want to dismiss all the hard work
that goes into informing you know that
opinion but you Eric Weinstein Sam
Harris like there are so many powerful
thinkers that I've had on the show that
I've had a chance to just imbibe their
information and I see it changing the
way that I think and so then it's like
okay well cool if the analogy holds what
I'm trying to do is you know plant these
seeds that will grow into something I do
have to understand the system which is
the soil understand what's working
what's not working so I think it's a
pretty powerful one-two punch man I'm so
glad like I'm super conflicted I really
hope you run in 2024 I don't know if
that's on the agenda for you or not but
having you as a part of the discourse I
was attracted to you like a moth to a
flame dude just the way that you analyze
the situation your background as a
debater the way that you stay super calm
do you actually seem open to new ideas I
am haunted by a quote and I'm sure
you've heard this before but it's Niels
Bohr if I'm not mistaken or plank one of
the two and said you know science
doesn't progress with each new discovery
it progresses when the old guard dies
and the new guard comes up recognizing
the truth is self-evident that sucks not
a lame way for things to make progress
right like I want to be fundamentally
changed by the interaction you have
gotten me to fundamentally rethink like
how sick is the soil here like is there
such a fundamental problem that it has
to be address and and I think it has
become
obscenely clear through covet 19 that
the answer is yes that we were always
sort of teetering on this precipice of a
just catastrophic problem and weren't
doing the things we needed to do so that
was a lot of words around thank you for
what you're doing thank you Tom I mean I
respect people who are both open and
flexible also just awesome at what you
do and you know it's like you're clearly
awesome at helping people get stronger
and I think it's beautiful it's like I
was an operator an entrepreneur if
anything actually it's just been a
learning process for me like interacting
with people and different types of
organizations where I'm like what the
hell's going on if you shook it off did
you'd be like what what's happening here
it's one reason why I think that we were
able to compete and contend is that we
had a different way of doing things than
other people in politics in this
industry and I think that niels bohr
quote itself is a source I mean it's
very apt unfortunately like you know we
you don't have like a contest of ideas
we're like the best ideas win like
there's actually something of an order
and then you you need to upend the order
it's one reason why we feel so far
behind in the public sphere and one
reason why someone like you saying I
don't pay attention that [__] I a
hundred percent respected appreciate
because it's like it's actually entirely
rational not to pay attention but I will
say that some of the problems were
facing with the coronavirus we're going
to need our government to improve and
accelerate in ways that it never has in
our lifetimes or we're going to be
facing a really really difficult
challenging time for like years and
years to come
yeah well said man well dude where can
people connect with you learn more stay
engaged where do they get the new
podcast yang speaks oh thanks man yang
speak wherever you find your favorite
podcasts you can follow me on social
media I'm at Andrew yang or interviewing
twenty twenty depending upon the network
what would certainly love to stay in
touch with everyone we have to dig out
of this we have to make it so that we
can plant beautiful trees that become
awesome pillars for like companies
families
communities and build a future that we
deserve I love a man last question if
you had to put into a sense what is the
impact that you want to have on the
world right now I'm focused on
eradicating poverty I genuinely do not
think that there is any reason for
people to be poor in the most abundant
society in the history of the world you
know we're at 21 trillion dollars right
now like we can't afford to improve
people's lives and give them like decent
soil essentially and it's not going to
work for everyone you can't make it
system-wide but there are some kids
growing up right now that just literally
have like zero chance you know and like
you can see it very clearly and that's
something that we can change I love it
did brother thank you so much for coming
on the show man I really appreciate it
everybody out there it does not matter
your political affiliation it is about
good ideas if you want to move your life
forward if you want to move the lives of
other people forward I promise you it's
going to be an idea centric approach and
not a personal centric
or you know what your tagline is not
right and left it's forward which i
think is brilliant and it's how
everybody should be looking at data
should drive decision all right speaking
of good decisions if you haven't already
be sure to subscribe and until next time
my friends be legendary take care thank
you Tom everyone there is no way to
build an empowering mindset or get ahead
in business without constantly learning
and accessing new information and today
I want to share one of my secret weapons
in the battle to learn new things and
get ahead for all of us who are
ambitious and busy it's almost
impossible to find enough time to sit
down and just read but thankfully there
is a practical app that solves that
problem and I highly recommend it the
app is called blink 'us blinka condenses
powerful nonfiction books into bite-size
text or audio you get the key takeaways
the need to know information from the
world's best non-fiction books in just
15 minutes you can read or listen to the
15 minute encapsulation and start
putting what you learn into practice
right away this really allows you to
focus on actually executing on the
skills that you're learning blink us
works on your
phone your tablet or your web browser so
it's accessible pretty much anywhere you
are right now 12 million people are
using blinka stand it has a massive and
ever-growing library from self-help
business health to history books
blinken's has the latest titles from
bestseller lists as well as the classic
nonfiction titles that you always wanted
to read but have never had the time to
to books from their library that I've
listened to and highly recommend our
start with why by simon Sinek and the
power of habit by Charles Duhigg with
plinkus you get unlimited access to read
or listen to a massive library of
condensed nonfiction books all the books
you want and all for just one low price
and right now for a limited time blinka
Staz a special offer just for our
audience so go to bling cast com slash
impact Theory try it free for seven days
and save 25% off your new subscription
that's blinka spelled BL i NK is t.com
slash impact theory to start your free 7
day trial and remember you also will
save 25% off but only when you sign up
at blink Escom slash impact theory
alright guys give this one a shot
empower yourself learn new stuff this
one is gonna be amazing
alright take care and be legendary and
you have to bet against the consensus
and be right or as an entrepreneur I'm
an entrepreneur I had to bet against the
consensus and be right and so to gain
that humility was the the thing so you
either get off the field or you learn